Why are flutes classified as woodwinds when most of them are made out of metal ? --T--  Each woodwind is played by blowing into them and fingering different holes to produce a different sound . Most of these instruments are made with wood . Flutes can be made either with wood or metal , though those used in an orchestra are usually made of metal . <D> Check local tag sales or church bazaars . Classified ad newspapers will often have them . But keep this point in mind ! <D> Some ethnic woodwinds have even more reeds , with up to four . Some of these woodwinds are made from wood , but most of them include metallic elements , or are made entirely from metal . Although some woodwinds could be confused with brass instruments , since they are made entirely from metal , they have a very different sound . <D> First , there is the material used for the body . While most flutes are made of metal , nowadays the majority of piccolos are made of wood . This is because the piccolo has a higher register , and metal piccolos can sound too piercing and therefore not blend well with other instruments . <D> The soprano sax is pitched one octave higher than the tenor sax , and the alto sax is pitched one octave higher than the bari sax . Even though the saxophone is made out of brass , it is classified as a woodwind instrument because a single wooden reed is used to produce sound . The saxophone is still young when compared to other instruments . <D> The best sounding clarinets are made of wood , but there are several plastic varieties . Keys on the instrument are made of metal . Pieces of the clarinet are the bell ( cone shape at the bottom ) , two main body pieces , mouthpiece , single wood reed , and a ligature that holds the reed on the mouthpiece . <D> Press Room Reports & Financials Contact Us Home > Learning & Community > Instruments of the Orchestra > Woodwinds The Woodwind Family The instruments in this family all used to be made of wood , which gives them their name . Today , they are made of wood , metal , plastic or some combination . They are all basically narrow cylinders or pipes , with holes , an opening at the bottom end and a mouthpiece at the top . <D> Membranophones Membranophones are musical instruments that use vibrating stretched membranes or skin to produce sound . Membranophones are classified according to the shape of the instrument . Kettle Drums — Also known as vessel drums , these are rounded at the bottom and may be tunable or non - tunable . <D> They are very unique , but still have always been considered woodwinds . Flutes used to be made of wood ; however , now they are made of metal . Reeds , and keys are the easiest ways to identify an instrument as woodwind , brass instruments typically have valves or slides . <D> Various devices , such as mutes , and various techniques ( for example , on stringed instruments , pizzicato and the harmonic , or flageolet tone ) can alter the sound of an instrument . Musical instruments are usually classified as folk and professional instruments . Folk instruments may be unique ( found among a single people ) or “ international”—that is , widely used by various peoples with ethnic or long - standing historical and cultural ties . <D> When choosing a piccolo , you can choose from a variety of materials . The most common are metal , plastic , and wood . Plastic is the cheapest , followed by metal , and wood is more expensive . <D> The warm timbre that is produced possesses great charm . Flutes are always woodwinds , even when they are made of metals , because that is what they are classified as - woodwind instruments - within the conventional system of classification of musical instruments . Woodwind instruments fall under one of two sub - classifications : flutes , and reed instruments . <D> Traditionally they were always made of wood , although some of them are now made of metal or plastic . In an orchestra there are four main types of woodwind instrument . <D> There is also an alto flute which sounds a fifth lower than the ordinary flute . Flutes are still sometimes made of wood , but mostly they are metal . The oboe can play slightly lower than the flute . <D> WOODWINDS FLUTE The flute , while part of the woodwind family , is not a reed instrument . It is classified as being an aerophone . Sound emitted from the flute is the result of air flow across the opening on the flute .
